Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project, interviewer Steve Fletcher, interviewee Liz
Dutton, the venue Swicker Office and the date is Sunday the 16th of November 2015. Liz,
would you be kind enough to spell your name for us for the record?
Liz Dutton. Thank you much indeed. Can you tell us when and how did you first get involved or hear
about the Cardiff Carnival? Well in my work as a youth worker part of my role was to organize play
schemes and one year I decided that I didn't want to actually organize and run a play scheme that I
just wanted to be part of and just be a play worker. So during that time somebody mentioned
to me that there was carnival going on at Fitzhallen School so I was a bit curious so I went along to
see you know what was going on and basically you know didn't leave. So that would have been back in
the distant past 1991. Yeah. And I remember you saying that you remember what you did I mean you
were dancing on the day itself were you in a dance group? Yeah. What kind of costume did you have the very first time round?
Gosh it was I think the basis of it was the skirt was I think was purple I knew I know
there was a multi-colored sash there was a headdress and there were bobbles on shoes and things.
It was a tribute to indigenous people I seem to remember. I think that was it. Which indigenous people I couldn't tell you
not off the top of my head by frankly. And that very first time that you got involved
did your children get involved at that point or did you bring them on on board the carnival bus
No no they got involved at that point my daughter actually was in the dance group with me and she had a costume
and my son was more or less Stuart he got involved in like the Stuart because he didn't want to like
dress up in carnival costume. But he supported the carnival every year you know those people in the yellow bibs are absolutely vital to it.
Yeah most definitely but yeah my daughter was in the dance group same as me and she really enjoyed it that first time.
That's fantastic. So whenever I think of your role in carnival I always refer to you as a carnival queen
because you always wore to my mind except for this possibly this first year
you always wore a large backpack costume which meant that you know you were what can I say
brilliant to look at you know big big costumes. So how did that come about was it was it working with Amaru or?
Yes it was actually. You always seem to design a costume that was like really large
but with a backpack so yeah yeah yeah. With a backpack quite dynamic really. Yes. It was fun wearing them
yeah it was you know it was really. Did the design get was it ever too what was it like I mean you
you're having to rehearse in these things you're having to add to them you come the big day of the
big parade you know you can take an hour or two with getting ready and all the rest of it. How comfortable
were they or did it change over time? It did change over time I mean in the beginning they were a bit
uncomfortable and you know adjustments were always being made and stuff but you know over
a course of time the backpacks got lighter so they were easier to move around in and yes I see
it seems to me to think yeah eventually we found tubular steel and that's right a joy of foam rubber
yeah that's right yeah so I can remember the early ones seem to virtually cripple people and
slowly but surely we yeah as a group we improved in what we were doing definitely yeah but um
you know with the carnival it was the whole thing of on the day you know watching people's faces
especially the little children you know in awe of what they were seeing you know because it was so
colorful and dynamic and they'd want to come up and touch you and you know and that kind of thing
and you know that part of it you know it was it was really good it was and the build-up to it as
well you know the whole carnival camp um I mean my son and daughter I mean they they met so many
people and they've grown up with so many um people of their their own age and and yet they only used
to meet them once a year a carnival camp but it was like they'd spoken to them yesterday
do you know what I mean and they've made lifelong friends and not only that it enabled my children
as well to learn to work alongside adults you know to work alongside adults and not only that
to work alongside lots of different people because my son and daughter they're grown up now and they
can they can relate to anybody you know whether they're old young you know you know any background
any background at all any walk of life at all yes and you know carnival you know played a
part in that to be honest you know it did yeah without without a doubt but you must have a fairly
amazing skills base now I mean uh again when I think of you I think of you sticking stuff on and
certainly with a glue gun and not necessarily going ouch ouch ouch every time that uh yeah you
push it and the rest of it so yes I mean tell me about the carnival camp and the skills that you
learned or what was that like it was quite amazing really um you know being part of a team of people
that that were you know putting together costumes I mean you have um you know particular tables that
were specific in certain parts of costumes and you know even just by watching other people you
were able to pick up skills that you could use again yourself I mean especially in my work um
like working with young people yeah you know I could take those skills that I was actually
doing and actually observing back to you know my work as a youth worker and a play worker I think
you also you mentioned you also did this in terms of some of the percussion and the rhythm and yeah
yes yeah um when I ran play schemes um I actually took the skills that I'd learned in carnival and
put them to use within the play schemes carnival theme every time I did a play scheme there was
always a carnival theme used to do tie-dye make headdresses I purchased instruments so they could
have a little percussion band and also um one year within my community um I organized
a carnival theme where Splot is the community I live in yeah and um we did a procession with
young people dressed up made costumes and doing percussion around Splot and that was part of um
Splot carnival uh it seemed to recall as well that um yeah obviously carnival the carnival camp ends
with a big carnival day in the parade but carnival art sort of as you say permanates into youth work
it certainly happened in schools and uh you reminded me earlier that uh there was an instance
where some of your group performed on stage at the Sherman theater is that right yeah that was
I can't remember what year that was but um obviously because I had a passion for carnival
in my work as a youth work I tried to encourage some of the young people that I work with to take
part and managed to also get some parents to take part as well and following the big carnival parade
um we um the young people performed their routine in the Sherman theater which was really
really lovely was absolutely fantastic but because you've got besides being a carnival queen of some
renown um you are a long-standing member of Samba Galez the college school Samba yeah yeah uh I
think you're sort of actually born born with a go-go bell in your hand I think so yeah absolutely
just in terms of Samba Galez um standout experiences or gigs I mean what uh what did
you ever go away sometimes we used to go away and play gigs yeah I mean islands did you come on to
no I didn't go to Ireland I did Glastonbury oh that's more than I did I think Glastonbury actually
used to conflict every year with the blind avon carnival so I would organize for the group to go
to Glastonbury yeah and I'd do blind avons such was my dedication to the job so I've never been
to Glastonbury yeah I went to glass what was that like that was absolutely amazing um I don't know
if you remember Jean that used to be in the band yeah bless her she's passed away now yeah yeah well
it was um when Jean was in the band we went to um and I'd never ever been to Glastonbury before
so I had no idea you know and it was it was an absolutely amazing time can you remember who was
headlining that year was a big name oh excellent yeah she started singing Venus Like a Child
with a very funny voice yeah yeah Bjork was headlining the year I went and it was that
I haven't been since because that experience for me was the best you never ever top that I don't
think so no you know you went there with the artist passes and the rest of it yeah that was you know
it was amazing um also with um Samba Band went to Edinburgh for hold my name yes I can't remember
I went I was there I was there that was truly amazing yes I'm very cold you know it was you know
to be in that street on that it was amazing there was a huge party of us there's probably about 40
of us yeah we were a whole coach whole coach you know we sold it out yeah and I remember before we
even got off the coach people were coming out of the pubs and wanting us to play there and then
if Johnny just arrived yes that sounds like a whole lot of people yeah yeah totally wild that was
absolutely amazing as well um well you're undoubtedly a carnival hero you're certainly
a carnival queen if through the magic of this recorder you're speaking to people in the future
I had to summarize or just let them know what was the value yeah what is what was the value
is the value of carded carnival what what words what thoughts come to mind as a final sort of
why was it so important for you for other people well it got me involved in something that
I had no experience of before and didn't know about you got to meet so many different people
from different walks of life who you you became friends with um and there's so many skills that
you can learn as well and you know on the actual day it's totally amazing you know the the buildup
to carnival but I think it's it's meeting other people you know um I think that that's
quite interesting to you know to meet other people from different walks of life yeah absolutely
absolutely what what did it feel well how did you feel the public responded to you as a queen
as your parading I mean did you feel that yeah did you feel the love I could definitely feel
no it was um it was really really good because um because obviously my work with young people
anyway you know um and you know when they see me dressed up you know they they were transformed
well transformed that's it that's the word steam transformed you know um it it did sort of sort of
ignite something that they might want to take part themselves do you know what I mean but um
the whole experience I mean you know if anybody ever gets a chance to take part in a carnival I
would suggest that they do I think on that note Liz Dutton thank you very much for your
carnival memories you're welcome Steve thank you